The ground truth of a dataset represents the set of
labels that determine which class each data element belongs to.
Bounding boxes that designate the area of a finding for localization tasks or actual
pixel level image masks that show
the exact pixels that contain a finding for segmentation.
Ground truths can be created in many different ways,
and these depend on the resources that are available to the algorithm developer.
The method by which they're created, however,
can have a significant impact on the overall accuracy of
the algorithm and also its reliability in a clinical setting.
Typical sources of ground truth are biopsy based labeling,
NLP extraction, expert labeling and labeling by another state of the art algorithm.
There are a lot of challenges in obtaining ground truth.
As we mentioned, if you are looking to use
biopsy data as your ground truth for training an algorithm,
it will require that you get data from more than
just the packs from your clinical partner since biopsy data
is stored elsewhere and that can often be
difficult and more expensive to obtain from your clinical partner.
If you have radiology reports,
one option that many researchers take is using
a natural language processing tool to extract diagnosis from.
One challenge here is that you either need to have
access to that tool or you will need to build it yourself.
Another challenge here is that your NLP tool will
probably not be 100 percent accurate in extracting diagnoses.
Let's take the following examples.
A report may say,
image does not contain pneumonia.
It would be relatively easy to make sure that
your NLP tool understands this type of negation and picks up on,
not contain pneumonia as there not being a diagnosis of pneumonia in the image.
But what about this example?
It is unlikely, given the findings in the report,
that pneumonia is present in this study.
NLP has a harder time understanding
complicated negations like this that are separate by a lot of contextual language.
In fact, the dataset that you use in your final project
uses NLP extracted labels from radiology reports.
The authors of the dataset indicate that they believe
the labels to be a little bit more than 90 percent accurate.
What happens if you're given a dataset of only DICOM and X-rays?
This can happen sometimes,
and it's one of the most difficult situations to be in as an algorithm developer.
Having a set of one million X-rays can feel like you're sitting on a pile of gold,
but they're actually pretty useless if you don't have labels to go with them.
In situations like these,
if you work for a well-funded company or research organization,
the tactic that is usually taken is to hire
a radiologist or team of radiologists to go through each image and label them.
This, however, is really expensive and also requires a lot of time on your part.
You will have to come up with a labeling protocol for
the radiologist and spend a lot of time communicating with them throughout the process.
Similar to using NLP to extract diagnoses from reports,
researchers are also starting to take the approach of using a state of
the art image based algorithm to create ground truth labels.
Just like in the NLP solution, however,
you won't have perfect accuracy with the solution,
at least not in 2020.
Coming back to our example,
where an organization hires a radiologist to
label a bunch of images specifically for a project,
how do we make sure that we don't have the problem of inaccuracy?
Radiologists are human beings and they make mistakes.
Additionally, some diseases are really hard to detect on imaging alone,
like we showed earlier with pneumonia and with
determining if a breast tumor was malignant.
So there is a technique called creating a silver standard,
that a lot of organizations who have the resources use.
This technique involves hiring
several radiologists to each make their own diagnosis of an image.
The final diagnosis is then determined by
a voting system across all of the radiologists labels for each image.
Note that sometimes radiologists experience levels are taken
into account and votes are weighted by years of experience.